--- Chunk 1 ---
As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does
not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes
of Health.
Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice
Biomed Imaging Interv J. 2006 Apr 1;2(2):e34. doi: 10.2349/biij.2.2.e34
High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical
guide
DA Wilkinson 1
Author information Article notes Copyright and License information
PMCID: PMC3097611  PMID: 21614233
Abstract
The widespread adoption of high dose rate brachytherapy with its inherent dangers
necessitates adoption of appropriate quality assurance measures to minimize risks to both
patients and medical staff. This paper is aimed at assisting someone who is establishing a new
program or revising one already in place into adhere to the recently issued Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (USA) regulations and the guidelines from the American Association of Physicists
in Medicine.

--- Chunk 2 ---
in Medicine.
K e y w o r d s :  High dose rate brachytherapy, quality assurance
INTRODUCTION
Within five years of its discovery by the Curies in 1898, Ra-226 was being successfully used in
brachytherapy [1]. For the next 50 odd years, radium was the isotope of choice for
brachytherapy applications, finally yielding to reactor-produced nuclides such as cobalt,
cesium, and iridium with much shorter half-lives. These γ-ray emitters, known as “radium
substitutes”, were at first used in low dose rate (LDR) implants (< 200 cGy/hr; typically 40 to 80
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 1/16

--- Chunk 3 ---
cGy/hr). More recently, the ability to produce high specific activity Ir-192 sources combined
with developments in computer controlled after loader technology has led to widespread
adoption of high dose rate (HDR) techniques, i.e. > 1200 cGy/hr [1].
The advantages of HDR treatments include
However, because of the dangers of using a source with very high activity (10 Ci), it is of utmost
importance to have proper quality assurance (QA) procedures in place along with the required
dosimetric and planning equipment, and appropriately trained staff. This guide focuses
primarily on the first (QA procedures) and the third (training) in this list. It is intended to assist
those who are in the process of establishing a program in HDR brachytherapy.
Since each country regulates its own medical use of radioactive material, it is the duty of the
medical physicist to establish a quality management program to satisfy those regulations. The

--- Chunk 4 ---
medical physicist to establish a quality management program to satisfy those regulations. The
focus of this review is regulations of the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission, as contained in 10
CFR Part 10 (medical use of byproduct material) [2] and recommendations made by the
American Association of Physicists in Medicine (AAPM). The latter are intended to provide the
medical physicist in the USA (and it is hoped other nations as well) the proper guidance to
ensure that brachytherapy procedures are carried out safely and with due attention to these
rules. There are two AAPM task group (TG) reports that are particularly relevant to HDR QA.
They are TG 56: Code of practice for brachytherapy physics [3], and especially TG 59: HDR
brachytherapy treatment delivery [4]. Another useful reference for brachytherapy quality
assurance has been published by ESTRO and is available on their website [5]. This paper will

--- Chunk 5 ---
assurance has been published by ESTRO and is available on their website [5]. This paper will
provide details about HDR QA as it is performed in our radiation therapy department (on a
Nucletron Microselectron system) and how the QA program is related to the NRC regulations
and the task group recommendations.
APPLICATOR QA
Prior to the initial use of a new (or replacement) applicator, it is necessary to verify that the
source dwell positions correspond to the radiographic marker positions used in simulation and
treatment planning. TG-56 recommends that coincidence of dummy and radioactive sources be
checked annually as well. There are many standard applicators; photographs of several of those
used in our institution are shown in Figure 1
greater ease and comfort for the patient (often as an out-patient),
more precise dose delivery,
easier dose shaping, and
less exposure to medical personnel.

--- Chunk 6 ---
more precise dose delivery,
easier dose shaping, and
less exposure to medical personnel.
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 2/16

--- Chunk 7 ---
Figure 1.
Open in a new tab
Examples of HDR applicators used for lung, rectal, and gynecologic diseases.
The method we employ to verify coincidence of dwell position and radiographic marker is
autoradiography. An applicator is taped securely to a sealed film envelope (Figure 2) and the
HDR after loader is programmed to send the source to a few appropriately chosen dwell
positions for less than 1 second (e.g. 0.3 s for 0.31 GBq source). Next, the film plus applicator is
transferred to a diagnostic X-ray source such as a simulator, the dummy source markers are
placed in the applicator and the film exposed and developed (e.g. 125 kVp, 125 mAs for Kodak
XV film). An example of this is shown in Figure 3. TG-56 recommends that the coincidence of
dummy and active sources be within 2 mm; the NRC regulations call for ± 1 mm.
🔍
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 3/16

--- Chunk 8 ---
Figure 2.
Open in a new tab
Photograph of a ring applicator secured to a base plate with film taped securely in place.
🔍
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 4/16

--- Chunk 9 ---
Figure 3.
Open in a new tab
Autoradiograph of a 3 cm ring showing 5 dwell positions (1,5,9,13,17) as well as the
intervening dummy markers (unnumbered arrows). Dwell positions are for the 0.5 cm
step-size.
PERIODIC SPOT-CHECK
The new NRC regulations require a periodic spot-check of each HDR unit prior to the first use
on any given day that the after loader is in operation and after each new source installation.
These spot-checks need not be done by the authorized medical physicist, but the latter must
review the results and notify the licensee in writing of his findings. Table 1 lists the checks that
must be performed at a minimum to assure proper operation of the unit according to NRC
Regulations 10 CFR Part 35.
🔍
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 5/16

--- Chunk 10 ---
Table 1.
Mandated periodic spot-checks.
1. Electrical interlocks at entrance to room
2. Source exposure indicator lights on the after loader, control console, and in the
facility
3. Viewing and intercom systems
4. Emergency response equipment
5. Radiation monitors to indicate source position
6. Timer accuracy
7. Clock (date and time) in unit’s computer
8. Decayed source activity in unit’s computer
Open in a new tab
A convenient way of implementing and recording the above quality assurance is by using a
checklist such as the one our clinic uses as shown in figure 4
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 6/16

--- Chunk 11 ---
Figure 4.
Open in a new tab
Spot-check form used each day of patient treatment. A downloadable version is available
at http://www.biij.org/2006/2/e34/fig4.asp
Certain tests require only a simple inspection to ensure that materials are present, viz. User
manual, Removal kit, Emergency instructions, Bailout pig, Radiation alarm setting, and Printer
paper. Switching on the system allows the tests in item 7 to be performed. The source activity
comparison can be made using a table generated by the medical physicist (Figure 5). This will
also satisfy the requirement (see Full Calibration below) for performing decay correction which
🔍
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 7/16

--- Chunk 12 ---
must be done by the authorized medical physicist. Agreement should easily be within 1 percent
tolerances.
Figure 5.
Open in a new tab
Source decay on physicist-generated spreadsheet (left) and printout from the HDR
control console (right). The actual numbers for the particular treatment date are 36772
and 36754 mGy m2 h-1 (respectively).
For the remaining tests, the active source will need to be deployed. For this, the system can be
programmed manually each time or a standard program recalled from the system memory. A
single dwell time of 20 to 30 s suffices to test the door interlock, the interrupt button, and the
emergency off button as well as to verify that the appropriate exposure indicators and radiation
monitors are functioning properly. The spot check form requires testing of the functioning of
the meter in the treatment room (Figure 6) under battery power alone. Its alarm setting of 4
mR/hr was established so as to be above exposure levels in the room due to an adjacent linac

--- Chunk 13 ---
mR/hr was established so as to be above exposure levels in the room due to an adjacent linac
therapy suite. As an additional safety measure, we have a calibrated GM meter that is carried by
hand by personnel upon entering the treatment room. It is checked using a 1 mCi Cs-137 source
that yields a 10 mR/hr contact value. The remaining item is an estimate of timer accuracy. For
this, a stopwatch is used to time a 30 s dwell. Typical error estimates are well below 1 second.
🔍
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 8/16

--- Chunk 14 ---
Figure 6.
Open in a new tab
Exposure rate meter mounted on a wall in the treatment room so as to be visible from
the entrance way.
FULL CALIBRATION
A “full calibration” is mandated for several different circumstances, e.g. before first medical use,
following a source change or any major repair, etc. Since the source in most, if not all, modern
HDR after loaders is Ir-192 with a half-life of approximately 74 days, the requirement for
quarterly calibration [2] does not formally apply. However, it is usual to replace an iridium
source four times a year so as to maintain reasonable dose rates and treatment times. Quarterly
QA testing of HDR after loaders was recommended in the report of TG 56. The components of a
full calibration as defined in NRC Regulations 10 CFR Part 35 are listed in Table 2
 🔍
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 9/16

--- Chunk 15 ---
Table 2.
Full calibration measurements (as applicable).
1. Output within ± 5%
2. Source positioning accuracy to within ± 1 mm
3. Source retraction with backup battery upon power failure
4. Length of the source transfer tubes
5. Timer accuracy and linearity over the typical range of use
6. Length of the applicators
7. Function of the source transfer tubes, applicators, and transfer tube-applicator
interfaces
Open in a new tab
The form we employ for the full calibration is on an Excel spreadsheet (Figure 7) which allows
convenient calculations of source activity and positioning as well as timer accuracy and
linearity. The activity of the source is measured using a well chamber and electrometer having
calibrations traceable to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (within 2 years as
indicated by the dates on the form). The electrometer needs to be calibrated in both current and
charge (integral) modes. The source is programmed to go to a series of positions within the well

--- Chunk 16 ---
charge (integral) modes. The source is programmed to go to a series of positions within the well
chamber and the maximum current reading is used to calculate the activity in air kerma units.
This value is then compared to the manufacturer’s stated activity decayed to the day of
measurement. Agreement is typically within 2%. The regulations allow a 5% range. If
equipment calibrations traceable to a national standard are not available, dosimetry system
constancy checks can be performed using a long-lived source such as Cs-137 [5]. This is not a
desirable substitute for proper calibration.
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 10/16

--- Chunk 17 ---
Figure 7.
Open in a new tab
Full calibration spreadsheet with actual calibration data. A downloadable version is
available at http://www.biij.org/2006/2/e34/fig7.asp
Positioning accuracy is measured using a special ruler supplied by the manufacturer (Figure 8).
The programmed position (e.g. 995) is for the center of the source, hence the correction (one-
half of the source length, or 2.15 mm) for the leading edge. The one mm criterion may not be
satisfied if there is much curvature in the measuring system (see Figure 9). Thus, some care
must be taken to ensure that the transfer tube is reasonably straight and horizontal.
🔍
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 11/16

--- Chunk 18 ---
Figure 8.
Open in a new tab
Source position ruler showing white plastic indicator (red circle).
Figure 9.
Open in a new tab
Source position accuracy test showing a well-aligned ruler, transfer tube, and afterloader
(left) and a set-up with a large curvature.
We perform the battery back-up test by shutting off the AC power to the after loader while a
source has been deployed. This makes it a somewhat different test compared to the one in the
spot-check where the emergency off button is pushed. That the source has been retracted is
printed out at the control console and is verified by the radiation monitor indicating exposure
rates below the set value (4 mR/hr).
🔍
🔍
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 12/16

--- Chunk 19 ---
Timer error and linearity are measured using a technique established for teletherapy sources.
Charge is collected and measured in the well chamber for a set of predetermined times. The
pass/fail criteria we adopted seem both reasonable and reproducible and well within the
capability of the system.
We test the integrity of the transfer tube/applicator system in three ways.
TREATMENT PLANNING QUALITY ASSURANCE
It is standard practice in external beam radiotherapy to have a second, independent check of
the treatment plan and monitor unit calculations. This may take the form of a simplified
algorithm using data from phantom measurements or dose measurements inside a suitable
phantom (especially for IMRT plans). For brachytherapy, the independent check is also
desirable (but not mandated by NRC regulation), but there is no generally accepted method for
doing it. Some characteristic parameter(s) of the plan must be compared to an expected value;

--- Chunk 20 ---
doing it. Some characteristic parameter(s) of the plan must be compared to an expected value;
however, what the characteristic parameters should be and how to arrive at the expected value
are left to each medical physicist or institution. TG-59 addresses these issues and lists several
approaches that have appeared in the literature [6-8]. Typically, the dose is calculated at
representative points by the treatment planning system and then compared to the results from
a second independent system (perhaps a spreadsheet or nomogram). It remains unclear what
agreement is acceptable. Our method has been to use a plot of treatment time x source activity/
dose versus the global parameter of treatment volume for various applicator types. This is
similar to the Paterson-Parker tables from the days of radium sources. It has been described
previously [9] and will be summarised below.
The treatment volume (usually V100 in our experience) is obtained from the dose volume

--- Chunk 21 ---
The treatment volume (usually V100 in our experience) is obtained from the dose volume
histogram (DVH). Several plans were run on both the Plato and a second treatment planning
system and the respective DVH’s compared to lend credibility to the use of this parameter. We,
then, used data from 20 to 30 patient plans for each of several applicator types (vaginal
cylinder, tandem/ring, endobronchial tube) to construct the T*A/D vs V100 plots. Several cases
for each applicator were double planned with a second treatment planning system (ROCS or
Once a program has been loaded into the control unit, a transfer tube + applicator is
attached to Channel 1 but the indexer ring is not locked.
The second test has the transfer tube removed from Channel 1 and the ring locked.
The final test has the transfer tube inserted into Channel 1, the ring locked, and an
applicator with an obstruction in it attached. It should be added that in the Nucletron

--- Chunk 22 ---
applicator with an obstruction in it attached. It should be added that in the Nucletron
system, failure to connect the transfer tube to the applicator properly will usually generate
the same error code as an obstruction.
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 13/16

--- Chunk 23 ---
Pinnacle) for verification purposes. The data on each graph were then fitted to either a straight
line or a second order polynomial using statistical methods. The result was then used for
checking new patient plans to ensure consistency. A summary of the initial use of this method
for two types of applicators is shown in Table 3
Table 3.
Percentage difference between newly created plans and our reference data.
A p p l i c a t o r l i n e a r 
a v e r a g e 	 d i f f e r e n c e 
p o l y n o m i a l 
a v e r a g e 	 d i f f e r e n c e 
n 
vaginal cylinder 5.45±.06% 2.76±.01% 34
tandem/ring 4.56±.02% 2.48±.02% 40
Open in a new tab
Clearly, the agreement is better when a polynomial is used for fitting the reference data. A
similar situation is found for other types of applicators as well.
Perhaps an even more important aspect of treatment plan quality assurance is to have a second
trained person inspect the plan and compare it with the written directive. The comparison

--- Chunk 24 ---
trained person inspect the plan and compare it with the written directive. The comparison
should include such items as the dose prescription (per fraction and per course of treatment),
the step size, dwell positions, etc. A more complete list is to be found in the report of TG-59. A
check-list that is part of the patient’s chart is a practical method to ensure that this aspect of
quality control is performed. Examination of other input data such as simulator films and
comparison with the treatment plan is also essential. In our institution, specially trained
radiation therapy technologists and the authorized user physician check the treatment plan.
TRAINING OF PERSONNEL
The clinical personnel involved in an HDR program include the authorized user physician,
authorized medical physicist, radiation safety officer, dosimetrist, nurse, and radiation therapy
technologist. Some of these roles may be combined into one. For example, the medical physicist

--- Chunk 25 ---
technologist. Some of these roles may be combined into one. For example, the medical physicist
may act also as the radiation safety officer and do the treatment planning in lieu of a
dosimetrist. The authorized physician and medical physicist should be certified by the
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 14/16

--- Chunk 26 ---
appropriate medical specialties board and have had special training in brachytherapy. Of prime
importance is the radiation safety training that all personnel involved in HDR treatments
undergo. This is administered to new personnel and then annually for all those in the HDR
program. Included is training in the proper response to a major emergency, in particular, failure
of the source to be retracted into the after loader safe upon completion of treatment or upon
power outage. The daily spot check should ensure that proper equipment (removal kit and
bailout pig) is in place and that simple emergency instructions are posted so as to be readily
available. If the source has to be retracted manually, the standard precepts of radiation safety,
viz. time, distance, and shielding, should be followed. If operation of the hand crank is
unsuccessful, then the applicator containing the stuck source has to be removed from the

--- Chunk 27 ---
unsuccessful, then the applicator containing the stuck source has to be removed from the
patient. Once again, speed is crucial as is having such items as long forceps and a flashlight on
hand. With the applicator plus source placed in the bailout pig and the patient and medical
personnel removed from the treatment room, the HDR suite should be secured and a service
engineer contacted for repair. We find it useful at the time of the annual training to review and
discuss in detail what each member of our brachytherapy team would do in various emergency
situations.
REFERENCES
1. Corbett PJ. Brachytherapy in carcinoma of the cervix: The state of the art. In: Martinez
AA, Orton CG, Mould RF, editors. Brachytherapy HDR & LDR. Columbia: Nucletron; 1990.
pp. 100–9. [Google Scholar ]
2. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission [Web Page] Available at http://www.nrc.gov .
3. Nath R, Anderson LL, Meli JA, et al. Code of practice for brachytherapy physics: report

--- Chunk 28 ---
3. Nath R, Anderson LL, Meli JA, et al. Code of practice for brachytherapy physics: report
of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 56. American Association of
Physicists in Medicine. Med Phys. 1997;24(10):1557–98. doi: 10.1118/1.597966. [
DOI ] [PubMed] [Google Scholar ]
4. Kubo HD, Glasgow GP, Pethel TD, et al. High dose-rate brachytherapy treatment
delivery: report of the AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 59. Med Phys.
1998;25(4):375–403. doi: 10.1118/1.598232. [DOI ] [PubMed] [Google Scholar ]
5. Venselaar J, Perez-Calataynd J, editors. A practical guide to quality control of
brachytherapy equipment [Web Page] 2004. Available at http://www.estro.be .
6. Kubo HD, Chin RB. Simple mathematical formulas for quick-checking of single-catheter
high dose rate brachytherapy treatment plans. Endocurietherapy/Hyperthermia
Oncology. 1992;8:165–9. [Google Scholar ]
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC

--- Chunk 29 ---
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 15/16

--- Chunk 30 ---
7. Ezzell GA, Luthmann RW. Clinical implementation of dwell-time optimization
techniques for single stepping-source remote after loaders. In: Williamson JF,
Thomadsen BT, Nath R, editors. Brachytherapy Physics. Madison: Medical Physics Pub;
1995. pp. 617–40. [Google Scholar ]
8. Rogus RD, Smith MJ, Kubo HD. An equation to QA check the total treatment time for
single-catheter HDR brachytherapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998;40(1):245–8. doi:
10.1016/s0360-3016(97)00487-2. [DOI ] [PubMed] [Google Scholar ]
9. Wilkinson DA, Clouser E, Fleming PA. A method for checking HDR brachytherapy
treatment plans. Radiother Oncol. 2004;71(supp 2):S47. [Google Scholar ]
Articles from Biomedical Imaging and Intervention Journal are provided here courtesy of
Department of Biomedical Imaging, University of Malaya; and the University of Malaya
Research Imaging Centre (UMRIC)
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC

--- Chunk 31 ---
25. 5. 22. 오후  10:49 High dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy quality assurance: a practical guide - PMC
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3097611/ 16/16

